For those following along, in our last discussion we implemented a reconciler that would take our custom components and ==render== them to DOM elements. This gave us the first primitives we needed to turn our code into a [viewable web app](https://www.effectualjs.com/archive/01-expansion/). However, that approach required destroying the DOM and rebuilding it from scratch on every change. This time, let's do a bit better.

^^^

## Units of Work

At some level, the process of taking our expanded tree and reconciling it to physical DOM elements _seems_ like it should be straightforward? After all, we need to do little more than create nodes that don't exist and update nodes that do!

In practice however, there are always important subtleties. The most salient for this task is that ==we need to plan out the work we want to do before we execute it==.

By planning this way, we can ensure that we can process our tasks in the correct order &mdash; minimizing the amount of work ultimately performed.

To manage this process, we introduce the concept of a "hydrate."

### The Box Model

We call these abstraction "hydrates" as they are empty boxes that represent the work we will do later. In this sense, they will be hydrated at some future point with the actual physical elements they create.

By introducing this box model, we can make certain statements safely:

- "I should be created as a child of this node"
- "I am found to the right of this other node"
- "I will have these new properties applied to me"

Once we outline this graph of boxes, then we can process them in topological order to ensure that the nodes are fully qualified before they're needed.

## A Two-Tiered Approach

In our previous discussion of expansion, we processed the entire virtual-DOM tree at once, executing nodes and expanding into further trees. During this expansion, we also look for unchanged nodes and avoid performing work when unneeded.

In our hydration pass, we once again traverse the whole tree, once again skipping past any operations that are unneeded in hopes of avoiding unnecessary work.

It's reasonable to ask oneself why we would want to disambiguate these two processes &mdash; after all, performing two passes simulataneously doubles the amount of work we need to do.

:::aside
This is a very reasonable question to ask if familiar with React's model! React uses an abstraction called "fibers" which encapsulate both the expansion nodes and the hydrates used by Effectual.
:::

Although its true that we need two passes with this approach, we also know from our first pass which nodes actually changed. This means that we can automatically fill any hydrates that are static from the previous pass, dramatically cutting down on the amount of work that we need to do.

Furthermore, by separating these into two separate processes, the separatios of concern become more clear and it's easier to excise the part of the code that actually touches the DOM itself.